---
title: Hyperfine coupling units
layout: post
permalink: /2019/02/03/hfc.html
---

This is a test of displaying math in html.
The content is based on: W. A MacFarlane, "Hyperfine coupling in "kilogauss per µ<sub>B</sub>" (Mar. 2007).
The original document can be found [here](http://bnmr.triumf.ca/PDFs/hfc-units.pdf).

---

The hyperfine Hamiltonian is:

$$
H_{\mathrm{hf}} = A_{12} \mathbf{S}_{1} \cdot \mathbf{S}_{2},
$$

where $$\mathbf{S}_{i}$$ are the dimentionless spin operators (i.e., spin angular
momentum operators divided by Planck's constant), and $$A_{12}$$ is the hyperfine
coupling constant. Clearly, $$A_{12}$$ has units of _energy_, so what the heck is
the unit kG/µ<sub>B</sub> (or kOe/µ<sub>B</sub>) and why is it used?!

In a nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) experiment, if you measure a shift $$K$$
in the resonance that is proportional to a susceptibility $$\chi$$, then the
proportionality constant is also known as the hyperfine coupling $$A$$, which is
related to the $$A_{12}$$ above. Practically then, $$K$$ is a _unitless_ quantity
(e.g., in ppm), and so too is $$\chi$$. This is easy to see since, for example,

$$
M = χ H,
$$

and $$M$$ and $$H$$ have the same units. Of course, this is assuming we have the
unitless "volume susceptibility" for $$\chi$$ and not the per mole or per gram
equivalents. If $$K$$ and $$\chi$$ are unitless in

$$
K = A \chi,
$$

then so too must be the coupling $$A$$. This, perhaps, is not helping clear
things up, but it is good to explore the extent of the confusion!

To get the conventional hyperfine coupling in the units kG/μ<sub>B</sub>, we use
instead

$$
K = \frac{A \chi}{N_{A} \mu_{B}},
$$

where $$N_{A}$$ is Avogadro's number and $$\mu_{B}$$ is the Bohr magneton (in
erg/G), which is about half the magnetic moment of the electron. The susceptibility
can then be defined in the following way. The magnetic moment $$m$$ of a sample
(containing $$N$$ moles of the compound) is measured. This moment is in units of
emu (i.e., in the cgs system of units). Note that the emu (no relation to the
[large flightless bird](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emu)) is a unit of magnetic
moment equal to an erg per Gauss (or J/T in SI), so the “susceptibility”
$$χ_\mathrm{total} = m / H$$ has units of emu/G or erg/G/G (or J/T/T in SI).
This is, of course, equal to units of volume, since the square of the magnetic
field is just the magnetic energy density. The molar value is gotten just by
dividing $$χ_\mathrm{total}$$ by $$N$$. Doing this we get the molar
susceptibility in emu/mol ($$χ$$). Thus, $$A$$ has units of (erg/G per erg/G/G)
or just G (i.e., it is a magnetic field), but, confusingly, one quotes this as a
certain number of G (e.g., kG, etc.) “per μ<sub>B</sub>” because of the
1/μ<sub>B</sub> in the expression for $$K$$. The $$N_{A}$$ in this definition
makes the resulting coupling an _atomic_ quantity (i.e., per atom whose nucleus
is coupled to the $$χ$$). If the atom in question is hyperfine coupled to $$Z$$
equivalent near neighbours, it is often useful to divide $$A$$ further by $$Z$$
to get a hyperfine coupling per neighbouring atom.

